Capstone Project – Comprehensive SOC Incident Response
📌 Overview

This project simulates a complete SOC workflow, including attack execution, detection, triage, response, post-incident analysis, and reporting. The objective is to demonstrate how a Security Operations Center handles real-world cyber threats using industry-standard methodologies.

🎯 Objectives
Simulate a cyberattack using Metasploit
Detect malicious activity
Perform alert triage
Execute incident response actions
Conduct root cause analysis
Calculate SOC metrics
Prepare executive and technical reports
🧰 Tools Used
Metasploit (attack simulation)
Windows VM (target/logs)
Kali Linux (attacker + analysis)
Threat Intelligence platforms
Documentation tools (Google Docs, Sheets, Draw.io)
🔴 1. Attack Simulation

A vulnerability in Metasploitable2 (Samba service) was exploited.

Command Used:
msfconsole
use exploit/multi/samba/usermap_script
set RHOST <target-ip>
run
Result:
Unauthorized access gained
System compromised
🔴 2. Detection

Suspicious activity was identified through system behavior and logs.

Timestamp	Source IP	Alert Description	MITRE Technique
2025-04-09 13:00:00	192.168.56.101	Samba exploit	T1210
🔴 3. Alert Triage
Alert ID	Description	Source IP	Priority	Status
101	Exploit Attempt	192.168.56.101	High	Open
Actions:
Verified source IP
Confirmed exploit attempt
Escalated alert
🔴 4. Incident Response
Actions Taken:
Blocked attacker IP
Isolated affected system
Terminated malicious session
🔴 5. Evidence Analysis
Network Analysis:
netstat -ano
Finding:
Suspicious external connection detected
🔴 6. Root Cause Analysis (5 Whys)
Question	Answer
Why attack succeeded?	Vulnerable service
Why vulnerable?	Outdated software
Why outdated?	No patching
Why no patching?	Weak policy
Why weak policy?	Poor management
🔴 7. Fishbone Analysis

Causes identified:

People: Lack of awareness
Process: No patch management
Technology: Vulnerable service
Management: Weak governance
🔴 8. Metrics Calculation
Metric	Value
MTTD	2 hours
MTTR	4 hours
Dwell Time	6 hours
🔴 9. MITRE ATT&CK Mapping
Technique ID	Name
T1210	Exploitation of Remote Services
🔴 10. Final Report (300 Words)

A simulated cyberattack was conducted using Metasploit to exploit a Samba vulnerability in a Metasploitable2 system. The attack successfully demonstrated how attackers can exploit outdated services to gain unauthorized access. Detection mechanisms identified the malicious activity, generating alerts for further investigation. The alert was triaged and confirmed as a legitimate threat originating from a suspicious IP address.

Immediate response actions were taken, including isolating the affected system and blocking the attacker’s IP address. Evidence analysis revealed suspicious network connections, confirming the compromise. Root cause analysis identified the lack of patch management and outdated software as the primary reasons for the attack’s success.

SOC performance metrics indicated a Mean Time to Detect (MTTD) of 2 hours and Mean Time to Respond (MTTR) of 4 hours, resulting in a dwell time of 6 hours. These metrics highlight the need for faster detection and automated response mechanisms.

Recommendations include implementing regular patch updates, improving monitoring systems, and enhancing incident response procedures. This exercise demonstrates the importance of proactive security measures in preventing cyberattacks.

🔴 11. Executive Briefing (150 Words)

A cybersecurity incident involving exploitation of a vulnerable system was successfully simulated and analyzed. The attack originated from an internal network source and targeted a known vulnerability in a service. The security team detected the activity and responded by isolating the affected system and blocking the attacker.

The analysis revealed that outdated software and lack of patch management were the primary causes. Key metrics showed a detection time of 2 hours and response time of 4 hours. While the response was effective, improvements are needed in proactive monitoring and automation.

It is recommended to implement regular patching, enhance detection capabilities, and conduct security awareness training. These steps will strengthen the organization’s defense against future threats and improve overall security posture.
